which can't because I wasn't even involved in
transit planning at the time, was they looked like
very different beasts in the way that they were
perceived in the public and all just a matter of
perception. What the issue was in this particular
referendum was there was a fat line on a map that was
a heavy rail and it only served certain areas And it
was not clear to a lot of people how the other areas
would be served and actually would benefit from
the system, the concept being that this is our
heaviest corridor. This is where we could achieve
significant savings by putting in a capital
intensive facility that would result in
operation savings and feed the rest of the system
into this, serve the same activity centers that
need to be served. Dallas, on the other hand, came
out proposing a huge system covering their entire
region, showing what they would like to see it look
like at build out. And I think did a much better job
of showing the full comprehensive system. That's
not to say that Metro didn't have a full
comprehensive system in mind. There was no way we
could not have had to be in line with the
alternatives analysis procedures that the Urban
Mass Transportation Administration requires.
You have to do an incredibly detailed level of work
on your operating plan, how it will affect your
system. So the planning had been done. It was just,
I think, presented differently. And it looks a lot
different. To my mind, that was a lot of the voter
reaction, was that we were just showing a segment
serving the middle class area, when in fact, we
were just showing a fixed guideway there and
potentials another. What that led to was going
back to the drawing board, refining the plans some
more to reflect, obviously, what the voters
didn't want. So the board worked with staff,
proposed several systems. The board eventually
got down to considering alternatives A, B, and C,
which were rail-intensive systems, or bus-only
systems, or primarily bus systems with where some
segments of rail were justified, where we could
get operational savings. That option C was
selected. And that's what you see here on this
regional transit plan map. And it pretty much just
shows you where the fixed guideways are, our
proposals for fixed guideways. You see the
various corridors. We discussed early
transitways in Gulf Freeway, in the North
Freeway. along 290, the Northwest Freeway, I-10,
and 59, showing other proposals we discussed
before, future extensions on East X-59 North, 288
South, and just a variety of other corridors that
look like fixed guideways would be needed. This is
the Fort Worth and Denver Railroad right-of-way.
That is a good direct access to the 1960 area, and
use of that corridor would would give us a good
commute. It looks like it's going out to Tumble.
Yeah, it's just to that whole 1960 area. This would
provide you several alternatives to funnel
traffic into the major activities. The stars you
see here are proposed major transit centers using
sort of the airline hubbing concept to feed you
into a hub and then offer you alternatives to get to
other areas. For example, Northwest traffic
being funneled into the Northwest Transit
Center, which will be developed at the site of the
intersection of the West Loop 16 and I-10 West.
We've acquired the site to build that facility and
are working on designing it at this point. The
others proposed, of course, downtown is
considered a major transfer center. The South
Rice Transit Center at 59, the Southwest Freeway,
and the West Loop 610. And this was originally
proposed further out on the West Park system. The
concept has been revised a lot since then. This was
adopted. The option C was adopted by the board. The
board recommended that staff go back and
reevaluate some particular areas that they
thought needed very close attention. So the
Regional Transit Plan is adopted after sincere
study. It was adopted in 1986, March of 86. In its
pretty much final form, you can see how there is
some difference in the way the guideways are
defined. An additional regional transit center,
the concept being that the routes will now have
sub-regional transit centers that will serve
neighborhoods. route you into one and give you
express buses to different locations. And the
fixed guideways have been looked at, refined
somewhat. One of the major revisions to the
refining the regional plan was the east side
improvements. A lot of discussion of the equity
issue that the east end is primarily a minority and
low-moderate income area, a Hispanic
neighborhood. in the south of the Ship Channel and
primarily a black and Hispanic mixed
neighborhood in the northeast side of Houston. So
a great deal of analysis went in there. A task force
was created composed of Metro staff members and
community representatives that worked long and
hard, held public meetings, had a lot of sessions
in defining it. And the conclusion of that task
force that the best way to serve the East End
remains with a very good, solid bus system that
routes you into transit centers,
shown here, and gets you to a system connector
proposed for phase two that would get you to the
major activity centers. So this has been adopted.
This is the regional transit plan, which the
authority is operating under at this point. And as
you can see, we're under construction the outer
reaches of the system on the guideways. By the end
of our first phase of the plan, which is a five-year
plan in 1991, we will have completed 69 miles of
transitways and freeway rights of ways on the
Gulf, North, Northeast, and Katy and Southwest
freeways. And phase two of the plan, to be built out
by year 2000, is we refer to as the system
connector, which is a transit corridor we've
identified in a loop shape in the inner city area.
And a lot of our recent study that's summarized in
this report called Building a Regional System is
examination of how this phase two system will be
done, what will be done in phase three, how it will
tie into phase one. So what you have is, in phase
one, the development of a lot of your base
facilities, the transitways, the major transit
centers, the minor transit centers in the
neighborhoods, expanding the bus fleet,
expanding the route system, building new bus
maintenance facilities to keep up with demand.
Phase two becomes the system connector, looking
at how to connect the major transit centers and the
transit ways and the activity centers to
implementation of that phase two gives us a full
regional system. It gives you the ability to go in a
reasonably timely fashion from one point in the
metro region to another point. And I just say
reasonably because you have to consider the size
of the area we're serving. It's a huge area. You
know, almost equivalent to the, well, it's a good
portion of Harris County. So it's huge. At some
point, it's 50 miles in width. So it's a huge system
to serve. Yeah, Ephraim was saying that the ETJ is
bigger than the state of Delaware. It's probably
in excess of, what, 1,200 square miles now,
probably more than that. Our system isn't as large
as the ETJ. It isn't the same configuration as the
ETJ. I don't know how the square mileage compares.
Any of the technologies that we're looking at for
the second phase, the system connector, would be
interchangeable like the system you were
describing. We already operate the system of
offering monthly passes or individual fares. And
with the transfer, an individual fare allows you
one transfer to an additional bus to complete your
trip.
When we're looking at fixed guidelines like a
light rail system at grade or a completely grade
separated light rail system or an elevated bus way
that's completely grade separated, which are the
three capital systems we looked at, or system
connector, you would be able to move from the bus
system to that without paying an additional fare,
or vice versa, to move either direction and be able
to transfer without a cost. OK. Mike, has there
been any serious discussion here at Metro of the
perennially discussed triangle for a rail
transit between San Antonio, Houston, and
Dallas. I think there's probably been some
discussion. I don't know much about it. I'm
familiar with the system. Does it periodically
appear in the press and that sort of thing, and then
one never hears anything more about it? It was
discussed again. The marketing rep for it made a
presentation at the APA conference in El Paso last
fall and described the system and their proposed
location for their terminal in Houston.
But there wasn't any discussion of local system
interface. Their proposed location of their
station would not allow us to directly interface
with our proposed alignment. That would be a
killing thing if it didn't. And this is what BART is
facing now in San Francisco. They should have
purchased the Southern Pacific right-of-way
which would enable them to go from CBD to the
airport directly, rather than going all the way
out to the beach practically, and then back down
through very difficult terrain in Daly City to the
airport, which is what they're contemplating
doing. Really? And it would make the trip about
three times as long in time as it really should be.
We don't include a direct line or a fixed guideway
system to either Hobby or Intercontinental
airports in our planning through phase three. We
believe basing a lot, of course basing our whole
system on ridership and the kind of facilities
needed to offer a viable alternative to the
automobile, which relates to how congested is a
particular roadway. Does that congestion
warrant putting us out and building us in our own
exclusive right of way? With the regional
mobility plan going into effect, a lot of that
being implemented, the implementation of Hardy
Toll
Road would provide excellent access, the
extension of the North Freeway bus transit way.
which we're working on now on the environmental
assessment and the cost-effectiveness
evaluations. And we already have grant funding
from Urban Mass Transit Administration in place
to help build that facility, and we have capital
set aside to match that grant, we'll have that
system extended all the way out to 1960. And so that
will provide an exclusive guideway to that
facility. With that, and potentially eventually
building a facility on the Eastex freeway, we'll
have a lot of alternatives to get to the airport.
And Intercontinental just could best be served
using bus, even express bus, if the demand's there
on Hardy Tell Road to Intercontinental. That's
the best service there. We already serve Hobby
directly, our Belford bus. We have a couple of
buses. I think it's the Belford Crosstown drives
through the Hobby garage to the drop off porch at
Hobby. So we're already providing some service.
It's not express service. But that demand doesn't
really seem to show itself. We're having biome to
requirements to address the corridors that are
the most congested. And that always brings us back
to this corridor that's embodied in the system
connector corridor. where all these activity
centers are in close proximity to each other. This
system connector, now the board is mulling over
some various alternatives that would link it to
the Texas Medical Center. And then further down to
the Astro Domain area, which is the Astro Dome,
Astro World, that area. And then with an extension
eventually running over to the area where we're
building the southeast transit center to serve
east side patrons. So that would give us a good
link. Then in phase three, we would look at this
Fort Worth and Denver cart going up to 1960. When
you use the term guideway, what exactly does that
mean? Okay. The guideway itself can be any kind of
guideway that's an exclusive right-of-way for a
transit vehicle. The bus transitways that exist
down the North Freeway and the Katy Freeway are
transit guideways. The proposals for Phase 2 of
the plan, the system connector, again, we're
grade-separated rail, and it's exclusive
right-of-way, either elevated or subway, and
completely removed from traffic, no conflicts.
um a system a busway alternative which has an
exclusive bus guideway elevated in the southern
part of this along the southwest freeway and then
with ramps into the downtown area and an automated
guideway transit facility going through the post
oak area a driverless train that we go from
Northwest Transit Center, down to the South Rise
Transit Center. That was the second alternative
we've evaluated. The third is an alternative
called a light rail alternative. It's at grade,
street level light rail, such as Portland or the
Muni system on the streets in San Francisco or a
variety of other systems. It's a popular
technology that's proven to be real economical.
That system run in San Diego, Tijuana Trolling.
Yeah, very similar kind of technology. It's
powered by overhead wires. We would be in our own
exclusive right of way running down Main Street
with a transit mall on Main Street, which is
proposed for all of our alternatives. Then it
would go out, transition, go through Midtown and
go into Richmond Avenue and east-west
thoroughfare, run along Richmond, transition
into West Park and run to the South Rice Transit
Center, then run up through the Post Oak Galleria
area on Post Oak Boulevard and then along the edge
of the loop, 610 west into this transit center.
That would provide for some future extensions to
other areas. as the grade-separated rail or the
busway would. The other alternatives we consider
are a very close examination of the TSM, or
transportation system management, which is
making do with the existing street system and
using relative low cost. Even still, that
alternative includes the automated driverless
train, the AGT for Post Oak, just because of the
congestion factors. We can never serve that area
well with buses given the projections that we
have. And of course, the final alternative in the
UMTA alternatives analysis is the no action
alternative. So staff has spent the past year
working on evaluating these different
alternatives Their recommendation to the board
of directors was that the street level light rail
system be chosen as the alternative, given the
fact that the cost of the system compared to the
efficiencies it provides gives us the best system
and still gives us adequate operation time. And
because the way the system can be financed
compared to more expensive Great Separated Rail
or Busway. It allows us to do these other
extensions that I mentioned before earlier than
we could have otherwise. Move some extensions of
the system, like to the Texas Medical Center and
Southeast Transit Center, into Phase 2 instead of
deferring them to Phase 3. And the board's
considering the system now, looking at some
alternatives to it and refining it, maybe
considering moving the Harrisburg corridor that
serves East End in early, although That's just
speculation. And that alternative appears to be
the best. They're considering that at the end of
July 87. They're supposed to give us some
direction on what they think is the most valid. And
that time, we'll begin developing a draft
environmental impact statement of that system,
doing all the cost effectiveness evaluation that
UMTA requires. And approximately a year after
that, be in shape to say whether it's actually the
best system or not. The draft environmental
impact statement will continue the evaluation of
all the alternatives. You're going to be busy.
Yeah. It's an amazing system. I've worked here for
a year, I guess a year and a week. And it's just been
amazing, the workload that's put on. Especially
given, amazingly enough, or maybe not even
surprisingly, the change in the economy made the
job much more difficult. We had to contract with
HGAC to revise the population projections.
Because those all go into our modeling, figuring
out ridership, and how everything's formatted.
And that's a very difficult job to do. Data of that
magnitude, demographic data, here goes through a
thing called the Interagency Database Task
Force. that reviews all the projections and
representatives from all the major agencies and
organizations that are users of that data.
Highway department, the city, the metro, the
county, all agree and adopt that particular
information. So all that information had to be
down. Yeah, Ephraim mentioned that. And it was
interesting to hear that there is that level of
cooperation, because there isn't even that level
of cooperation within the agencies of the state
government in Boston. They usually come out with
two forecasts. Really? That review is very
comfortable. I think it's a very valid thing to do.
Sure. It sounds like the way to go. The most
qualified people are there examining it, and I
think it really gives it a lot of forethought goes
into the projections. We ended up, of course, we
had a down grade our revenue forecast because of
sales tax problems. Oh, yeah.